## Trauma and Madness

### Mental Health

This page is concerned with presenting a fictionalized version of trauma and mental disorders, and as such, bears little relation to mental illnesses as they exist in real life.  This section fits tropes of adventurers being driven to madness by the eldritch horrors they encounter in their adventures.

The goals of this page were to (1) give players a system that fulfills genre expectations, and (2) to encourage characters to take Vacations.

One of the DM's goals is to (3) limit gameplay to what your players are comfortable with.  The best way to do this is to have a conversation with your players.  How do they feel about using a Madness table in their GLOG game?  What are their genre expectations?  What are your genre expectations?

It should go without saying, but if the group decides for a more light-hearted game of GLOG, you are better off not using this section at all.  Similarly, if the group would prefer to avoid shallow fictionalizations of mental disorders, just don't use this section.

A compromise might involve limiting the Madness Table to only the first 1d6 entries.

## Rolling for Trauma

You will gain Trauma when horrific stuff happens to your character.  Here's an incomplete list of things that incur Trauma.

* Near death experiences (rolls on the Mutilation Matrix).
* The death of a longtime friend.
* Getting your first mutation.
* Critical fails on mental effects (such as fear, illusions).
* Seeing the world through *true sight* for the first time.
* Learning the unspeakable truths.
* Listing to the things that Outsiders say.

Whenever you gain Trauma Points, roll a d20.  If you roll equal-or-less than your Trauma score, you suffer a Breakdown.  When the Breakdown ends, all of your Madnesses that are in remission become active and you gain a new Madness, up to a maximum of 3.  Then, your Trauma is reduced to X, where X is the number of Madnesses you have.

Your first Madness is generated by rolling 1d6 on the Madness Matrix.  Subsequent Madnesses are generated by rolling 1d20.


#### 1. Specific Phobia

You gain a phobia that is triggered by whatever gave you the Trauma.  Whenever you are exposed to your trigger, you must either flee from it or hide from it.  Every round you are exposed to your phobia, or every round you choose to ignore your phobia, you take 1d4 Emotional damage (Fear Breakdown).

#### 2. Dungeon Phobia

As above, except the phobia is triggered by a common dungeon risk.  Pick the most relevant item on this list, or roll for one randomly.

* Darkness (most common)
* Water
* Heights
* Claustrophobia
* Being Alone

#### 3. Specific Misia

Similar to Specific Phobia, except that when you are exposed to your trigger, you must destroy it or drive it off.  Every round that you are exposed to your trigger and do not actively try to destroy it, you take 1d4 Emotional damage (Rage Breakdown).  

#### 4. Safety Fetish

Look at the current situation.  What object is currently providing the most safety to the character?  It is usually an ally, but it can also be an item like a shield or a torch.  That object is now their safety fetish, and if they are ever without that object, they take 1d4 Emotion damage per round (Fear Breakdown).

#### 5. Paranoia

You will never trust anyone ever again, not even your allies.  You will never sleep next to your allies; if you are forced to, you will stay away all night and wake up at 0 HP.  You will never accept food, drink, or magic from your allies; if you are forced to, you take 1d8 Emotion damage (Fit Breakdown).

#### 6. Nightmares

You only regain 1d6 HP when you sleep.

#### 7. Hoarder

Once an item is added to your inventory, you will never give it up.  Items briefly held don't count.

#### 8. Split Personality

Create a second character within your current character's mind.  The new character shares the physical ability scores but mental ability scores are rolled anew.  They keep their level, but lose all class abilities until they gain a level (separately).  Every session, and every Breakdown (staring now), flip a coin to see which of the two personalities is dominant.  Split XP between the personalities proportionate to time.

#### 9. Amnesia

You forget this session, the previous session, and your best class ability.  You will not be remembered these things until the Madness goes into remission.

#### 10. Hallucinations

You should never trust anything the DM tells you.  If you are traveling with your party, this isn't so bad, since you can get your cues from them.  Whenever you speak more than a few words, you are guaranteed to say something strange.

The first round of every combat, the DM rolls on the Hallucination Table, describes what's going on, and asks you to declare your actions for the first round.  You'll continue seeing any hallucinations for the rest of the encounter, but the character can use context information (and the player can use metagame knowledge) to act normally.

#### 11. Dissociated

Automatically fail all saves against mental effects and illusions.  Automatically lose initiative the first round of every combat.

#### 12. Anxiety

-4 to all social Charisma checks.  -4 Loyalty for all of your hirelings.

#### 13. Aggression

In combat, can never attempt any actions that doesn't result in an enemy losing HP.  Lasts until all enemies are defeated or driven off.

#### 14. Alien Limb Syndrome

One of your arms becomes an NPC.  Roll up a random personality and goals.  Allow it to behave like an NPC, even going so far as to communicate through hand signs.  If it ever fails a loyalty check, it will turn against you.

#### 15. Delusions of Grandeur

You believe yourself to be the leader of the group and will allows act like it.  If you are ever prevented from acting in this capacity, or if someone else acts like the leader of the group, you take 1d20 Emotion damage (Rage Breakdown against whatever is aggravating you).

#### 16. Depression

You don't want to do this anymore.  The first time you can safely leave the party and retreat to a town, you will do so, going on a permanent Vacation and becoming an NPC.  Unlike other Madnesses, Depression is not removed by a Vacation.

At the end of every session, if the party attempts to cheer you up, Depression has a 2-in-6 chance of being removed.  This chance can be improved by appealing to your Convictions and/or bringing you a gift.

If a session passes without any visits from friends, you have a 1-in-6 chance of ending your life through suicide.  You will leave a note for the party, and bequeath them all of your worldly possessions.

#### 17. Cannibal

You must eat a part of everything you kill.  If any of your allies die, you must eat a part of them, too.  If you are unable to do this, you take 1d20 Emotion damage (Rage Breakdown).

#### 18. Compulsive Intoxication

Whenever an opportunity to get messed up on mind-altering substances, you must engage to an unwise degree.  This might be a long-term modest impairment, such as staying drunk the whole session and doubling your critical fumble chance.  Or it might be a single heavy trip on purple lotus.  

If an entire session ends without you getting dangerously fucked up, the DM can start compelling you to eat/drink every strange substance you come across.  You have a 50% chance to resist this compulsion.

#### 19.  Demonic Possession

Your trauma has allowed a foreign entity to invade your mind.  This is not a Madness, and so it cannot be cured by a Vacation.

The possession begins gradually.  The first day, the personality is inflected.  The second day, the demon can seize control for 1 round.  Then, 1 minute.  Then, 10 minutes.  Then, an hour.  Then 12 hours, and the process is inverted.  The player can only control their character for an hour.  Then, 10 minutes.  Finally, they can only control their character for 1 minute every day.  These time periods must be continuous.

Sample demon: Ibrichai the Two Tongued, servant of Goxiliad the Angeleater.  Ibrichai shares his master's goals, and knows the spell *ignite*.  He will seek to (1) remain in the Underworld, (2) burn beautiful works of art, and eventually (3) sacrifice beautiful people by burning them.  (Burning things sends them Hell, where Goxiliad can enjoy them.  He doesn't torture people, he just forces them to enact his plays.)

If the player agrees to serve Goxiliad, Ibrichai will agree to become their familiar.  He will manifest as a hairless cat with a human mouth.

#### 20. Psychic Projector

Whenever you gain a Trauma point, you create a pseudo-imaginary copy of whatever threat caused you to gain this Madness.  You might generate pseudo-imaginary copies of dragon, but you are just as likely to generate pseudo-imaginary copies of a the crevasse that broke your leg.  If you got this Madness from watching a friend die, you will generate a psuedo-imaginary version of your dead friend, who will then wander around interacting with a random person each turn and giving them 1 Trauma.


Compulsive Gambling.  Compelled to gamble.  Lose 100 XP each session unless you make an unwise choice to gamble.
Compulsive Intoxication.  Compelled towards substance.  Lose 100 XP each session unless you consume intoxicants unsafely.
Compulsive Religiosity.  Compelled towards religion.
Sadism. Must physically harm a helpless creature every session.



Breakdowns

If someone is reassuring you and trying to calm you down, they can make a Cha check every 10 minutes to end your Breakdown.  Otherwise, it lasts 1d6 x 10 minutes.

After the Breakdown ends, you gain a random Disorder.

1-3  Fear.  Compelled to seek safety by fleeing or hiding (whichever seems less dangerous).
Catatonia.  Compelled to follow friends around, but cannot speak or take any other action.
Fit.  Held items are thrown in random directions.  Screaming causes a roll on the wandering monster table.
Rage.  Compelled to attack enemies, and cannot help allies or flee combat until all enemies are dead or driven off.
